Electrocardiograms (ECGs) plays a crucial role in the diagnosis of cardiovascular diseases. However, Billions and Billions of historical electrocardiogram (ECG) records exist solely as paper printouts or scanned images, making them incompatible with modern AI/ML diagnostics, which requires clean 1-D time-series data as input, making the physical records useless for AI/ML diagnostics. Hence, digitization of these existing records i.e. scanning the paper records(JPG) and converting these images back into clean, 1-D time-series data is required. 


<there are models which take these scanned images directly and classify them and we have added comparing them with digitization pipelines in our future work>

While the recent advancements in optical digitization pipelines such as ECG-Image-Kit used in the PhysioNet 2024 Challenge, have made it possible to convert these images back into 1D time-series data, the extraction process is inherently lossy and highly deterministic which introduces severe optical artifacts, including quantization noise from pixel-to-millivolt conversion, unremoved grid lines, and severe baseline wander caused by paper skew or fading ink. Standard low-pass or high-pass filters (e.g., Butterworth filters) are ineffective, they fail to separate the optical noise from clinical signals like the QRS complex or T-wave variations, because both the optical noise and clinical signals share the same frequency bands. Moreover, applying these filters often destroy the underlying clinical morphology along with the noise. This leaves a gap for a non-linear, learned approach to signal refinement.

In this thesis, we engineered the OD-PTB-XL benchmark dataset which contains 7,601 perfectly aligned, paired (noisy-to-clean) signals with embedded PTB-XL clinical labels. We proposed a novel architecture  application of a Conditional Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (cDDPM) as a post-digitization refinement step in the baseline. We used Kolmogorov-Arnold Network (KAN) layers, leveraging their adaptive spline functions to correct massive non-linear baseline wander. The KAN-enhanced DDPM achieved a state-of-the-art **+1.17 dB improvement in Signal-to-Noise Ratio (ImSNR)** and reduced Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) in 89% of unseen test patients.

Furthermore, we conducted rigorous downstream clinical evaluations.